Remake of the GitHub lecture (#79)
UtrechtUniversity/workshop-computational-reproducibility: book/chapters/version-control.qmd

2. Click on "Add file" and then choose whether you want to "upload" a file from your computer, or if you would like to "create a new" file and edit the text in the web browser.

  ![](../images/github_figures_screenshots/git_add_file_browser.png){fig-align="center"}

  In case you upload files add a Commit title and text, or in the case of editing a file click on "Commit changes" and add a title and description.

  ![](../images/github_figures_screenshots/git_commit_message.png){width=20% fig-align="center"}

3. Adjust the README.md file. Go back to the top level of your repository and click on the README file and then click on the pencil in the grey row above the text. 
![](../images/github_figures_screenshots/git_edit_readme.png){fig-align="center"}
This opens and editor in "edit" mode. Adjust the README a bit (we will also do some changes later). With the "Preview" button (next to "Edit") you can see how the file will be rendered.
MarkDown files are an easy way to create documentation. If you are not yet familiar with MarkDown please have a look at one of the many [MarkDown Guides](https://www.MarkDownguide.org/basic-syntax/).

> **A word on "Commits"**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::: {.callout-note}

## A word on "Commits"

```

> As we saw in the previous section the commit titles are shown in the history of the repository. The title and the message will help us later to understand what we updated and why we updated the code base.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we saw in the previous section the commit titles are shown in the history of the repository. The title and the message will help us later to understand what we updated and why we updated the code base. 

We recommend following conventions for writing commit messages:

1. Keep it short
2. Use imperative mood
3. Explain what the change is in the title
4. Optionally add a description for more context and why you made the change

Using the GitHub interface now create a commit for every small change that we make to a file. Later on you will be making changes on our own laptops which allows for combining multiple changes into one new commit. In that way we can do with less commits which makes it easier to navigate the history of a project.

:::
```

Now that you have started to customise your new GitHub repository, let's have a look whether we can do that in a bit more convenient way, directly on your computer instead of through the web browser.

## Working with your repository on your laptop

::: {.callout-note}

- Understand the difference between a local and a remote repository
- The pull - commit - push workflow

:::

> ![](../images/github_figures_screenshots/git_create_repo.svg){width=700 fig-align="center"}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> When you create a repository on GitHub, it exists as a remote repository. This repository contains all files, but also information on commits, history and concepts that we have not discussed yet like  branches and tags.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you create a repository on GitHub, it is not present yet on your own computer as a git repository. It now only exists on GitHub and contains all files, but also a history of your project consisting of commits. 

::: {.callout-note}
## Remote vs Local repository
From now on, we will refer to the repository on GitHub as "remote repository". A repository on our own PC we refer to as "Local repository". The remote and local repository are copies and 'connected' to each, and you have to make sure that any changes that you make to your local repository are "Pushed" to your remote repository. The other way around, when changes are made to the remote repository they need to be "Pulled" to update the local repository. More detail in the section below.

:::
```

> With cloning your remote GitHub repository you create a copy of all that on your computer. This we call a local repository. On your local repository you can change and add files without changing the remote GitHub repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Clone your repository

To create a copy of the repository on GitHub on our own PC we have to "Clone" the repository.
```

> So this allows you to play around with your code and in case you messed up you can set the state of your code back to the remote repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### Clone your repository

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Let's create a local clone (copy) of our remote GitHub repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Click on the name of your repository to go back to the top level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Click on the name of your repository to go back to the top level.
```

> You will see a green button "Code", click on the button, choose the "SSH" and use the copy icon to copy the url in the field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You will see a green button "Code", click on the button, choose the "SSH" and use the copy icon to copy the url in the field.
```

![](../images/github_figures_screenshots/git_clone.png){fig-align="center"}

> Open your git bash or terminal, navigate to the folder in which you would like to create the folder for your repository (e.g. `cd git_repos`) and do:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Open your git bash or terminal, navigate to the folder in which you would like to create the folder for your repository (e.g. `cd git_repos`) and do:
```

```
git clone <paste the url here>
```

Now you can `cd` into you local repository and start working.

### Update the remote GitHub repository
![](../images/github_figures_screenshots/git_workflow.svg){width=700 fig-align="center"}

> Let us open the README file again. You can do by opening a commandline editor like nano or vim (Mac, linux) or you can go to your file browser and open the README file with e.g. Notepad.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let us open the README file again. You can do by opening a commandline editor like nano or vim (Mac, linux) or you can go to your file browser and open the README file with e.g. Notepad or VS Code.
```

Change something in your README file, e.g. add an extra sentence to the description, save it and go back to your git bash or terminal.

Let us check how git detects changes between the local and remote repository, type in:

```
git status
```

You will see that git detected that the README changed. How can we now update the remote GitHub repository with our local changes?

We first have to "add" the changed files:

```

> git add <path shown in the status>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
git add <path of the file as shown in status>
```
```

```
and observe the change of the status:

```
git status
```

From the web interface we know, that all changes come with a commit message. Let's add it:

```
git commit -m "<Replace with your message>"
git status
```

Now you will see in the status message that there is one commit on your computer waiting to be send ("push") to the remote GitHub repository.

```
git push
```

Go to the browser and inspect the history and the new changes in your remote repository.

### Update the local repository

Assume you changed your remote repository through the browser, how do you update your local repository?

Make another change to your README file in the web browser of GitHub and commit the change. Now go back to your terminal and do:

```
git status
git pull
```

Voilá, the changes from the remote GitHub repository are now in your local repository.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The difference between `git pull` and `git clone`:

`git clone` is a one time action to get a copy of an online repository on GitHub that is not present yet on your PC. `git pull` is done to update the repository with any (potential) changes to the online copy of this repository on GitHub.
```

## The .gitignore file

With the command "add" you have to specify folders or files to add to a commit. Everything that is not added explicitly will be ignored 
in the commit and "push".

In some cases we never ever want to add certain files to the GitHub repository, although we need them or they are created automatically locally. Think of Mac's infamous ".DS_store" files or resulting data from your workflow that you do not need to upload to GitHub since the code creates them.

To always ignore certain files we have the ".gitignore" file.
Your repository contains an example. Please inspect it in you local repository. When you are working on Mac please also add

```
# mac specific files
.DS_Store
```

You do not need to upload this file to the remote repository. the ".gitignore" file works on your local repository. However, if you are working together with people on your code, it is wise to add the file to the remote repository since then all of your users will respect, that certain files should not be uploaded.

### Summary

> - We went through the power of the GitHub web interface to setup a project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We explored the GitHub web interface to setup and manage a project.
```

> - We saw the use of employing templates to get our initial file folder structure and some essential default files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We used a "template repository" to initiate a repository with a predefined file folder structure and some default files to make life a bit easier.
```
